## MongoDB Database Guide

Finch uses [mongo_dart](https://pub.dev/packages/mongo_dart) package for MongoDB database operations. You can use the `mongo_dart` package to perform database operations in your Finch application.

## Connect to MongoDB Database

To connect to MongoDB database, you need to add the following code to your `app.dart` file.

```dart
import 'package:finch/finch.dart';

void main() async {
  final configs = FinchConfigs(
    dbConfig: FinchDBConfig(
      enable: true,
      host: 'localhost',
      port: '27017',
      user: 'database_username',
      pass: 'database_password',
      dbName: 'database_name',
    ),
  );

  final server = FinchApp(configs: configs);

  server.start().then((value) {
    Console.p("Server started: http://localhost:${value.port}");
  });
}
```

In the above example, we have enabled the MongoDB database and specified the host, port, username, password, and database name. You can change these values to match your database configuration.

## Use MongoDB Database

To use the MongoDB database, you can use the `app.mongoDb` property. This property returns the `Db` object that you can use to perform database operations.

```dart
var db = app.mongoDb;
``` 

## Database Collections

Finch provides a simple way to create database collections for MongoDB database. You can use the `DBCollection` class to define the structure of your database collection. The `DBCollection` class provides a simple way to define the fields of your collection. You can use the `DBField` classes to define the fields of your collection.

```dart
import 'package:finch/finch.dart';

class ExampleCollection extends DBCollection {
  ExampleCollection() : super(db: app.mongoDb, name: 'example');

  Future<void> insertExample(ExampleModel model) async {
    await collection.insert(model.toJson());
  }

  Future<List<ExampleModel>> getAllExample({
    int? start,
    int? count,
  }) async {
    start = (start != null && start > 0) ? start : null;
    var rows = await collection
        .modernFind(
          limit: count,
          skip: start,
          sort: DQ.order('_id'),
        )
        .toList();
    return ExampleModel.fromListJson(rows);
  }
}
```

In the above example, we have defined a collection named `example` with two fields: `title` and `slug`. The `title` field is defined as a string and is set as the primary key. The `slug` field is defined as a string.

You can use the `DBCollection` class to create collections for your application. You can also use the `DBCollection` class to create relationships between collections. For example, you can define a foreign key relationship between two collections.

## Querying Data

Finch provides a simple way to query data from your MongoDB database. You can use the `modernFind` method to query data from your collection. The `modernFind` method provides a simple way to query data from your collection. You can use the `DQ` class to build your query.

```dart
var rows = await collection
    .modernFind(
      limit: count,
      skip: start,
      sort: DQ.order('_id'),
    )
    .toList();
``` 

## Example

For more information, you can check the [example](https://github.com/uproid/finch/tree/master/example) project in the Finch repository. The example project uses MongoDB database and Finch's database features.
