# MySQL Database Guide

Finch uses [mysql_client](https://pub.dev/packages/mysql_client) package for MySQL database operations. You can use the `mysql_client` package to perform database operations in your Finch application.

## Connect to MySQL Database

To connect to MySQL database, you need to add the following code to your `app.dart` file.

```dart
import 'package:finch/finch.dart';

void main() async {
  final configs = FinchConfigs(
    mysqlConfig: FinchMysqlConfig(
      enable: true,
      host: 'localhost',
      port: 3306,
      user: 'database_username',
      pass: 'database_password',
      databaseName: 'database_name',
    ),
  );

  final server = FinchApp(configs: configs);

  server.start().then((value) {
    Console.p("Server started: http://localhost:${value.port}");
  });
}
```

In the above example, we have enabled the MySQL database and specified the host, port, username, password, and database name. You can change these values to match your database configuration.

## Use MySQL Database

To use the MySQL database, you can use the `app.mysqlDb` property. This property returns the `DatabaseDriver` object that you can use to perform database operations.

```dart
var db = app.mysqlDb;
``` 

## Database Models (Sql based tables)

Finch provides a simple way to create database models for MySQL database. You can use the `MTable` class to define the structure of your database table. The `MTable` class provides a simple way to define the fields of your table. You can use the `MField` classes to define the fields of your table.

```dart
import 'package:finch/finch.dart';

final table = MTable(
  name: 'users',
  fields: [
    MFieldInt(name: 'id', isPrimaryKey: true, isAutoIncrement: true),
    MFieldVarchar(name: 'name', length: 255),
    MFieldVarchar(name: 'email', length: 255),
  ],
);
```

In the above example, we have defined a table named `users` with three fields: `id`, `name`, and `email`. The `id` field is defined as an integer and is set as the primary key and auto-incremented. The `name` and `email` fields are defined as varchar with a maximum length of 255 characters.

You can use the `MTable` class to create tables for your application. You can also use the `MTable` class to create relationships between tables. For example, you can define a foreign key relationship between two tables.

## Sqler

Finch uses [sqler](https://pub.dev/packages/sqler) package to build SQL queries. You can use the `sqler` package to build SQL queries for your MySQL database. You can use the `sqler` package to build complex queries with ease.

## Example

For more information, you can check the [example](https://github.com/uproid/finch/tree/master/example) project in the Finch repository. The example project uses MySQL database and Finch's database features.
