# SQLite Database Guide

Finch uses [sqlite3](https://pub.dev/packages/sqlite3) package for SQLite database operations. You can use the `sqlite3` package to perform database operations in your Finch application.

## Connect to SQLite Database

To connect to SQLite database, you need to add the following code to your `app.dart` file.

```dart
import 'package:finch/finch.dart';
import 'package:sqlite3/sqlite3.dart';

void main() async {
  final configs = FinchConfigs(
    sqliteConfig: FinchSqliteConfig(
      enable: true,
      filePath: './example_database.sqlite',
    ),
  );

  final server = FinchApp(configs: configs);

  server.start().then((value) {
    Console.p("Server started: http://localhost:${value.port}");
  });
}
```

In the above example, we have enabled the SQLite database and specified the file path for the database file. You can change the file path to your desired location.

## Use SQLite Database

To use the SQLite database, you can use the `app.sqliteDb` property. This property returns the `Database` object that you can use to perform database operations.

```dart
var db = app.sqliteDb;
``` 

## Database Models (Sql based tables)

Finch provides a simple way to create database models for SQLite database. You can use the `MTable` class to define the structure of your database table. The `MTable` class provides a simple way to define the fields of your table. You can use the `MField` classes to define the fields of your table.

```dart
import 'package:finch/finch.dart';

final table = MTable(
  name: 'users',
  fields: [
    MFieldInt(name: 'id', isPrimaryKey: true, isAutoIncrement: true),
    MFieldVarchar(name: 'name', length: 255),
    MFieldVarchar(name: 'email', length: 255),
  ],
);
```

In the above example, we have defined a table named `users` with three fields: `id`, `name`, and `email`. The `id` field is defined as an integer and is set as the primary key and auto-incremented. The `name` and `email` fields are defined as varchar with a maximum length of 255 characters.

You can use the `MTable` class to create tables for your application. You can also use the `MTable` class to create relationships between tables. For example, you can define a foreign key relationship between two tables.

## Sqler

Finch uses [sqler](https://pub.dev/packages/sqler) package to build SQL queries. You can use the `sqler` package to build SQL queries for your SQLite database. You can use the `sqler` package to build complex queries with ease.