---
doc_meta:
    group: "Advanced Features"
    icon: "ph-bold ph-terminal"
---
## Commands Guide

Welcome to the Finch Commands Guide! This guide will walk you through the steps to use commands in your Finch application. Whether you're a seasoned developer or just starting, Finch offers a robust set of tools to simplify server-side web app development.

## Adding Custom Commands

You can add custom commands to your Finch application. These commands can be used to perform various tasks such as database migration, language management, etc. To add a custom command, you need to use the `addCommand` method. Here is an example of how to use it:

```dart
app.commands.add(
  CappController('example', options: [
    CappOption(
      name: 'test',
      shortName: 't',
      description: 'An example option',
    ),
  ], run: (c) async {
    if (c.existsOption('test')) {
      CappConsole.writeTable(
        [
          ['Column 1', 'Column 2', 'Column 3'],
          ...List.filled(5, ['Data 1', 'Data 2', 'Data 3'])
        ],
        dubleBorder: true,
        color: CappColors.warning,
      );
    }

    return CappConsole(
      'This is an example command from Finch App! Time: ${DateTime.now()}',
      CappColors.success,
    );
  }),
);
```

### Note:

`Capp` is a package that provides a simple way to manage commands in your application. you can use this package to add commands to your application. for more information please refer to the [Capp](https://pub.dev/packages/capp) package.

### Run a command after start the server

You can run a command after start the server. for example you can run a database migration command after start the server. to do this you need to use the `runCommand` method. here is an example of how to use it:

```shell
dart run example/lib/app.dart example --test
```

in this example `example` is the name of the command and `--test` is the option that we want to pass to the command.

Note: you have to pass the arguments of main function to the `runCommand` method. for example if you have a `--port` option in your main function you have to pass this option to the `runCommand` method. for example:

```dart
/// app.dart

final app = FinchApp(configs: configs);

void main([List<String>? args]) async {
   ...
   app.start(args);
}
```