---
doc_meta:
    group: "Core Concepts"
    icon: "ph-bold ph-cube"
---
# Controllers Guide

Welcome to the Finch Controllers Guide! This guide will walk you through the steps to create and use controllers in your Finch application. Whether you're a seasoned developer or just starting, Finch offers a robust set of tools to simplify server-side web app development.

## What is a Controller?

A controller in Finch is a class that handles HTTP requests. It is responsible for processing the request and generating a response. Controllers are used to organize related request handling logic and can be associated with routes to process incoming HTTP requests.

## Creating a Controller

To create a controller, you need to extend the `Controller` class. Here is an example of how to create a simple controller:

```dart
import 'package:finch/finch_route.dart';

class MyController extends Controller {
  MyController();

  @override
  Future<String> index() async {
    return rq.renderString(text: 'Hello World');
  }
}
```

In this example, we have created a controller called `MyController` that extends the `Controller` class. We have also overridden the `index` method to handle the request and generate a response. The `index` method is called when a request is made to the route associated with this controller.

## Using a Controller

To use a controller, you need to associate it with a route. You can do this by setting the `controller` property of the `FinchRoute` class. Here is an example of how to use the `MyController` we created earlier:

```dart
FinchRoute(
  path: '/',
  controller: MyController(),
);
```

In this example, we have created a route that matches the root path (`/`) and associated it with the `MyController` we created earlier. When a request is made to the root path, the `index` method of the `MyController` will be called to handle the request and generate a response.

### Note:
  `index` function is default function for controller, you can use any name for your function and use it in route definition. for example:
```dart
class MyController extends Controller {
  MyController();

  Future<String> myFunction() async {
    return rq.renderString(text: 'Hello World');
  }
}
```
```dart
FinchRoute(
  path: '/',
  controller: MyController(),
  index: MyController().myFunction,
);
```
