---
doc_meta:
    group: "Template & Views"
    icon: "ph-bold ph-layout"
---
# Template Guide

Welcome to the Finch Template Guide! This guide will walk you through the steps to use templates in your Finch application. Whether you're a seasoned developer or just starting, Finch offers a robust set of tools to simplify server-side web app development.

## What is a Template?

A template in Finch is a file that contains the HTML structure of a page. It can also contain placeholders for data that will be filled in at runtime. Templates are used to generate HTML pages that are sent to the client.

## Jinja Template Engine

Finch uses a jinja template engine for rendering views. The template system provides powerful features for creating dynamic web pages with clean separation of concerns.

## Template Syntax

Finch uses a jinja template syntax for rendering views. The template syntax is similar to the jinja template syntax. Here is an example of how to use it:   
```html
{{ variable }}           <!-- Basic variable output -->
{{ object.property }}    <!-- Access object properties -->
```

for more information about the template syntax please refer to the [Jinja Template Engine](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/templates/) documentation.

or follow the [Jinja Package Dart](https://pub.dev/packages/jinja) documentation.

## A basic example of a template:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
  <title>{{ title }}</title>
</head>
<body>
  <h1>{{ heading }}</h1>
  <p>{{ content }}</p>
  {% for item in items %}
    <p>{{ item }}</p>
  {% endfor %}
</body>
</html>
```

## How can add custom event functions to the template (jinja)?

You can add custom event functions to the template by using the `Request.localEvents` map. This map contains all the custom event functions that you can use in your templates. For example, if you want to add a function that returns the current year, you can do it like this:

```dart

final localEvents = {
  'currentYear': () => DateTime.now().year,
};

Request.localEvents.addAll(localEvents);
```

and then you can use it in your template like this:

```html
<p>The current year is {{ $l.currentYear() }}</p>
```

## How can add custom filters to the template (jinja)?

```dart

final localLayoutFilters = {
  'customDate': (value) => DateFormat('yyyy-MM-dd').format(value),
};

Request.addLocalLayoutFilters(localLayoutFilters);
```

and then you can use it in your template like this:

```html
<p>{{ date | customDate }}</p>
```
